---
layout: getting-started
---

# Advanced Tools

WebAssembly is supported by a number of tools to help developers build and
process source files and generated binary content. If you're a compiler writer,
enjoy low level coding or just want to experiment with the raw WebAssembly
format, these tools are for you.

There are currently two distinct sets of tools that are of interest to compiler
writers or developers who want to work with WebAssembly binary generated by
other tools like [Emscripten](https://kripken.github.io/emscripten-site/):

- [WABT](https://github.com/WebAssembly/wabt) - The WebAssembly Binary Toolkit
- [Binaryen](https://github.com/WebAssembly/binaryen) - Compiler and toolchain
  infrastructure

## WABT: The WebAssembly Binary Toolkit

WABT (we pronounce it "wabbit") is a suite of tools for WebAssembly, including:

### wasm2wat tool

This is a command line tool that takes a binary file as input and generates an
output file containing the readable text.

Developers could edit or manipulate the text file in some other way and convert
it back into the binary format for things like trying out optimization
algorithms, tracing, inserting debugging hooks, etc.

### wat2wasm tool

This is a command line tool that performs the inverse of **wasm2wast**, i.e. it
converts files from the WebAssembly test format into WebAssembly binaries.

Using **wasm2wat** and **wat2wasm** together allows lossless round tripping of
WebAssembly binaries, and provides developers with a convenient way to
manipulate the content of WebAssembly binaries using external tools.

### wasm-objdump tool

This is a command line tool for inspecting WebAssembly binary files. It works in
a similar fashion to that tradition UNIX objdump and can, amongst other things,
be used to disassemble to code in a WebAssembly binary.

#### wasm-interp tool

This is an interpreter that lets developers run a WebAssembly binary from the
command line stand-alone. It implements a stack-machine based interpreter that
interprets the WebAssembly binary directly. This differs from how a browser
would JIT the WebAssembly binary into native code for its target architecture at
load time.

The interpreter can be useful for running unit tests, validating WebAssembly
binary files, etc. outside of a browser environment.

## Binaryen

[Binaryen](https://github.com/WebAssembly/binaryen) is a comprehensive set of
tools with supporting infrastructure for use as the backend of compilers that
are targeting WebAssembly as an output format. It has a C API and implements its
own internal intermediate representation
([IR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intermediate_representation)) of program
logic and can perform a number of optimizations on the IR, support
parallelization of code generation, etc.

For example, binaryen is used as part of the compiler
**[asm2wasm](https://github.com/WebAssembly/binaryen/blob/master/src/asm2wasm.h)**
that can convert asm.js files into WebAssembly files. It's also used for
supporting the [LLVM](https://llvm.org/) compiler infrastructure generation of
WebAssembly and compilation from [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/en-US/).

Developers working on compilers, advanced optimization techniques and so forth
should take advantage of binaryen and its tools that include a shell that can
load and interpret WebAssembly code, assembler and disassembler, converters for
asm.js and LLVM .s files into WebAssembly and so on.

Tool developers are highly encouraged to explore the full set of functionality
implemented by binaryen.
